# Maryland Voter Turnout Dashboard
Our news app is designed to allow users, specifically Maryland residents, to examine the shifts in voter turnout activity and party alliance between the 2020 and 2024 presidential elections at the county level. We present general key findings about statewide voter turnout changes and trends, and encourage users to explore their county in detail by selecting it from a dropdown menu.

Once users select their county, they are provided with a box/section for County Political Context that describes their county’s party alliance and alliance strength, the results from the 2024 presidential election, and the turnout percentage difference between the two leading parties (Democrat and Republican). The context is based on the 2024 presidential election. It’s meant to give users an understanding of how competitive parties are in a given county, which can help them determine the significance and impact (if any) of the changes in turnout activity. In every tab/view, users are presented with a bar chart that visualizes the percentage changes in official voter turnout across all parties (including Green, Libertarian, and Other) and an interactive table that shows the turnout change percentages for all parties, color coded by the type of change (green for increase and red for decrease).  

On the official turnout tab, users can also find summary cards for the changes in statewide, Democratic, Republican, and Unaffiliated voter turnout, with the winning party marked by a check. This view showcases the changes in official voter participation by party, which users can compare and analyze against the county’s political preference/context. In the active voters tab, users can learn what defines an eligible active voter and identify which parties have grown or decreased in support through active voter registration. Similarly, the inactive voter tab defines eligible inactive voters and learn which political parties are susceptible to losing support from existing registered voters. Since both views involve registration, we added a registration check tab that links to the Maryland State Board of Elections voter lookup tool. 

Additionally, users can compare the changes in official turnout, active voters turnout, and inactive voters turnout between two counties to determine which counties are experiencing the most significant shifts in voter turnout. This can reveal the counties that should be focused on during primary elections leading up to the next general election. 

Overall, we wanted to provide users with a close look at how voter turnout changed among parties in their county between the 2020 and 2024 presidential elections. 

# Development 
Before we began coding, we cleaned the source data from Excel files and organized it into CSV files and eventually into the turnout.db database that serves the information to our app. One of the major changes we made to the data was leaving out the voting method columns because the changes weren’t interesting or insightful for our target audience. 

We initially used the IKE Labs application as our inspiration, so we created a home page and individual pages for each view of the voter turnout data. We added interactive tables to each page using the DataTables library, which initially displayed the raw turnout numbers for each year for each county, meaning that each county had two records per table. To avoid overwhelming the users with raw data, we created CSV files and peewee models with the changes in turnout for each county and data view, and consolidated minor parties - No Labels Maryland, Working Class Party, and Bread and Roses - into the “Other” category. 

After the vibe coding demo, we turned to Claude and asked it to consolidate the three individual pages into a single page/dashboard because they displayed different data, but used similar features for each county (a bar chart and table). This allowed us to easily provide our data at the county-level with a single dropdown to display a detailed view of voter turnout by party for a given county (or two for comparison). Using Claude allowed us to save time by passing through our templates and data from GitHub, and detailing the ideas we had for our dashboard, but couldn’t quite figure out how to code. This allowed us to add CNS styling and minor, but insightful features like the registration check, summary cards, color-coded tables, and the political context. 

# Unbuilt Features and Blockers
- We would have liked to have had an LLM like Groq analyze the data by county and extract the specific changes that should be highlighted for each county. Not every turnout category had significant changes between the two elections for each county, so an LLM might have been able to find which changes to emphasize with each county. Due to a lack of time and the token limits that are involved in testing and editing the LLM prompt, we were unable to build this feature.  
- It would’ve been interesting to have a section comparing Maryland data to other voter turnout data across different states. We just didn’t have other data for different states and the time to build this, but it would’ve been interesting to include another page on the news app generally comparing how Maryland compared to other states. 
- It’s always nice to have a methodology section of the news app explaining more about where we got the data from and how we built the news app. Although we have summaries within our Github repo, we didn’t have a methodology section in the news app because of time constraints.
- We wanted to have a choropleth map that used color intensity to highlight the counties with the most drastic change in turnout, but the differences were too minor for a choropleth map to be useful. If our app included data from other elections, we might have had significant/notable changes to display in a map.  